Over the past two years, we've been working on this workflow that's been helpful for us
in processing large amounts of data very quickly in order to create products that help guide
the decision-making in the state of where to allocate resources. This workflow involves
three main products, Microsoft Azure DevOps, RStudio Workbench, and RStudio Connect. If
you were at the keynote this morning, you'll realize some of these terms are a little outdated
since RStudio is now changing to Posit. When I first started working at CDPH, it was December
2020. I was living in Washington, D.C. in Foggy Bottoms, not too far from here. If you
remember in our personal lives, it was quite stressful, so going outside was kind of like
rolling the dice of whether you might get sick or get others sick. And you can imagine
working in public health is also quite stressful. Our infrastructure wasn't prepared for the
amount of data that COVID was going to provide, and we were often trying to catch up and get
ahead. I happened to be working on a report at that time that got sent out at the end
of the day, and I would get this beautiful data set that was processed by my many colleagues
from the local health jurisdictions and at the state level, and sometimes there would
be delays. It's no fault that anyone, the situation was very complicated, data was always
changing, so this often meant 9 p.m., 10 p.m., 11 p.m., California time, midnight, 1 a.m.,
2 a.m. in D.C. So I often looked like this. I was very tired, and my cat was wondering
why I'm still awake. As a team, we knew this wasn't feasible, and we needed to do something
to change this, not only to meet the needs of the state, but also to improve our work-life
balance. So eventually this workflow came about, allowing us to do our work more efficiently,
and I got into bed at a more reasonable time. So reducing our stress required four main
things. The first one is how we prioritize our task. How do we improve our ability to
collaborate with each other? How do we decrease our turnaround time? And lastly, how do we
scale our work? So I'm going to start with how do we improve our prioritization? So during
this time, there were many requests always coming in, and there was often an undertone
of I needed this yesterday, and that's very true, because the questions and issues that
we're having impacted the health of millions of people. And the issue, however, is that
as a team, we're quite limited. There's only so many of us. Our skills vary, and we want
to be able to solve these issues, but we only have so much time as well. So we needed
a way to prioritize how we move forward in our work. So that's where our first product
comes in, Microsoft Azure DevOps, and we use Microsoft Azure DevOps at CDPH because we're
a Microsoft shop, but you could use other DevOps platforms as well in place of this.
So we started using Azure DevOps for project management, in particular a sprint board,
and a sprint is a defined period of time that you set to complete a number of tasks, and
what's really great about a sprint is that at the very beginning of the sprint, it forces
you to sit down and decide what needs to be done, what can realistically be done in this
time period, and who's going to do it. And for us, we happened to use a two-week sprint
time, but you could use a different amount of time as well. So what I'm going to do next
is show you what our sprint board looks like to give you a sense of that. So we have five
columns, features, not started, declined, in progress, and done. In the feature column,
you're going to have an overarching project, so, for example, preparing for the conference
talk, and within that, you're going to have a number of tasks to complete within your
sprint. So in the not started, I might have a task about drafting slides or practicing
this presentation, and you can be the judge of whether I successfully did these or not.
I may have a decline column, such as adding cat gifs, and at some point decided this wasn't
a professional enough thing to add, so I'm not going to do that. I'll have an in progress
column, such as drafting outline, which I need to do prior to doing the slides or practicing
my presentation, and lastly, I'll finish a couple of tasks, too, such as making this
sprint board example, which, again, you can judge whether I successfully did that or not.
And then we'll have other rows with other features for separate tasks, and this creates
a really great visualization for our team of how we're doing in this sprint, and what's
really powerful is that as sprints continue to occur, we can look back in time and see
how successful we were at completing our task and modify how we're going to move forward
in the next sprint. And if you're disappointed that I didn't add any cat gifs, I added some
last minute for you all. So next, how did we improve our collaboration?
So when I first started, we were using Git and DevOps principles in some places, but
it wasn't a main part of our workflow, so a lot of our work was shared across a shared
drive or folder at work, and that often meant copying your R script, for example, and then
making edits and later putting it back together, which over time was starting to make a lot
of problems, especially when it came down to production or it was late at night, at
midnight, and edits were just very frustrating and tiring to do.
So we started to use Git workflow more effectively and made it a main part of our workflow.
So if you think about our work in RStudio Workbench, it's kind of like we're in a silo.
It's really hard to share this work with others or the colleagues, and we wanted to be able
to do that. So that's where we started using repositories
via Azure DevOps, and a repository is a place where you can store your code safely, have
version control, and it's the central place that all of your work can live, and what's
great about this is that via RStudio and Git, we can move our work outside of our silo into
this repository, and in that same vein, I can move other people's work from the repositories
into my Workbench and work on it there. Now, you can have an entire workshop about
Git and still may not understand it. It's very confusing, but it's a really great resource
by Jenny Bryan called Happy Git that's related to using Git and R that I highly encourage
you to check out if you want to get started with Git and R.
So you can think of repositories as if you're storing your code safely. So in these photos
by Edward Muybridge, we're seeing this bird in flight, and we're getting snapshots of
it over time, and you can think of our code, every time we make a commit or a save, we're
saving a version of it in memory in a repository. So maybe you want to put this last snapshot
into production, but something goes wrong. What's great about repositories is that we
can roll back the clock and use this previous version to go into production and in the meantime
fix our errors that occurred later on. Another really great feature is that you can
make what's called a fork or a branch of your repository, and that's like making a copy
of it, and you can kind of think of it as if you're working in your own lane in that
sense. We're all running in this sprint, and I have my own fork or branch, and I'm working
it, making edits, and if I happen to make a mistake, it's not going to affect others
in their lane. So it gives us a really great opportunity to try new things out, fall over,
break the app, all of those things that we don't want to happen during production.
And lastly, how do we improve our turnaround time and scalability? So we're always getting
requests and lots of data that we're taking ownership of, and these data processing can
take hours, and at the same time, we also want to be able to scale our work and share
it with others. So that's where our final product comes in, RStudio Connect, and this
is a server that allows you to automate your processes, and what's really cool is that
from our repositories in Azure DevOps, we can deploy our work into RStudio Connect.
And from Connect, we can automate data processing, we can schedule reports, and we can host Shiny
apps. So RStudio Connect provided us more processing
power, which allowed us to do analyses more quickly. So just as an example, this is one
of our servers. We have about 251 gigabytes of RAM, which is a lot, or another example
of the amount of CPU cores available, and we have a number of these servers available
to us to do different types of data processing or host apps, and I can't explain the giddiness
I felt the first time I ran a script on Connect that took ten minutes when it used to take
over an hour to run if it didn't crash. So Connect was a really great lifesaver in terms
of finishing our data processing in a more quick manner, allowing me to go to sleep earlier.
So it's not only quicker, but it also freed up our hands. At least in our environment,
we're limited to two workbenches, so it's kind of like having two R consoles or two
tabs, and if I have many types of data that I need to process throughout a week, it's
as if my hands are tied. So by being able to offload it off to a server, I can free
up my hands to do other type of work. And we can schedule jobs on the server using,
for example, the Officer or OpenXLSX package to make PowerPoints, Excel sheets, or Word
documents. In that same data processing, we're going to also be doing the large amount
of data processing and then creating reports that are output at a scheduled time. We can
schedule e-mails with the Blasto package, and a couple e-mails here and there is not
too bad, but when we start to initiate e-mails and data with a lot of different partners,
this becomes a really great tool to use. And here's one example of data that we put on
the website weekly for post-vaccination infection data if you want to check it out, and all
of this data is processed via Connect and then shared with our partners at CDPH to
later publish on the website. So you can kind of think of Connect as if they're replacing
us. They're robots, they're running in their own lane, and they're running their own processes.
And so at this point, I might want to sit back and look at my cat and listen to her
and stop looking at this monitor, but in reality, automation isn't perfect and often actually
fails and can be quite challenging to debug. Working on a server, the debugging process
is a lot different. The logs are different. So we tried to, so we need to think about
that as well. So in reality, it's more like this. We're all running in the same lane.
Some of the processes are falling over, I'm falling over, et cetera. And one of the solutions
to this was to create a data processing monitoring app. So this monitors all our processes on
Connect, and it gives us a really great visualization of what's occurring and when it might fail.
And in addition to that, we have an error logging system where if something breaks,
we get an email via Blastula telling us something's broken and where in that script it broke.
So I don't have time to share that with you right now, but if you're interested, there's
actually a talk by my colleagues Colby Parrish and Andy Pham coming up next that you can
check out to see that specific piece of our workflow.
And then lastly, we have many different Shiny apps, mostly internal that I can't share with
you, but one that was published to the public by the California COVID-19 modeling team called
CalCat, and this shows you the current state and predicted future state using different
models of COVID-19 in the state of California. So I encourage you to check this out and see
the different types of data that we're working with, and what's, I think, really cool is
that you can download the data as well that we've all been processing and that's updated
regularly.
So this gives you a very high-level overview of the different tools that we use to create
this workflow using Azure DevOps, RStudio Workbench, and RStudio Connect, allowing us
to process data in a very quick amount of time and freeing up our hands to make products
that help guide decision-making in the state of where to allocate resources.
So thank you all for your time, and special thanks to the data processing and informatics
section for all of her work.